Using AWS Lambda together with SQS is a very common serverless pattern
that has always suffered from some special limitations.
We covered SQS in a dedicated episode last year,
but recently we've had a significant new feature solving a common pain.
And today we want to dive deeper into using SQS and Lambda together
and tell you all you need to know about using SQS triggers,
about scaling and concurrency.
I'm Eoin, I'm here with Luciana,
and this is another episode of the AWS Bites podcast.
AWS Bites is sponsored by fourTheorem.
fourTheorem is an AWS consulting partner offering training,
cloud migration and modern application architecture.
You can find out more at fourtheorem.com
and you can find that link in the show notes.
Luciano, let's start with addressing the basics
for anyone not intimately familiar with AWS Lambda and SQS.
We have a lot of seasoned experts out there listening,
but we also know that plenty of people are listening and watching
or taking their first steps with AWS or these serverless offerings.
Do you want to give a quick overview and a quick elevator pitch for SQS and Lambda?
Okay, I'll try my best and I'm going to start with Lambda.
So Lambda is basically a function as a service offering
that is available on AWS.
So what that means is that it is effectively a managed compute service
with a very simple abstraction.
As developers, we are familiar with the concept of a function,
which is basically a piece of code that takes some inputs,
executes some logics and returns some output.
And Lambda basically takes that particular model
and provides it as a managed on-demand compute layer.
So as a user, you write your own Lambda function,
you can use many languages, so pick the language of your choice.
You write your own business logic in that particular shape,
so in that particular function format,
and then you just tell AWS when to run that particular function.
And generally, this is in response to a particular event.
Just to give you an example, that event can be an HTTP call
if you're using something like API Gateway
and you are trying to implement an API in a serverless fashion.
It can be a schedule, I don't know, every Monday at 9am,
maybe you want to do something,
so you can trigger the Lambda that way on that schedule.
Or maybe you want to react to certain files being created in S3,
that can be another trigger.
Or maybe, because we are going to be talking about the integration with a queue,
you can trigger your Lambda as a response to a new message
being available in SQS, which is a queueing system available in AWS.
So let's just talk more about SQS as well.
So, very similar to Lambda, SQS is another managed,
scalable service provided by AWS.
So if you need a queueing system and you don't want to manage
all of the deployment updates, security patches, scalability by yourself,
you just go on AWS and you provision a new SQS queue.
And just to explain why you would want to do that,
let's present an example.
Or actually, in a more generic sense, let's just say that you have some
piece of functionality going on, but also you might want to do
more work on demand in the background.
For instance, I don't know, you are sending transactional emails,
or you need to resize some pictures, or you need to run some workloads.
For instance, you have some text available in picture format,
and you want to extract the text, maybe running an OCR algorithm.
So all things that you don't want to do in line,
you probably want to offload in the background,
and maybe you want to parallelize that kind of compute.
So what you could do there is you could create a queueing system,
maybe use just SQS, and then every time a new job becomes available,
you get the definition of that job.
Rather than doing it straight away in the process that receives
the definition of the jobs, you just send it to the queue,
and then the queue is going to keep it in storage somehow,
and other workers in the background can just ask to the queue,
is there something I can do?
They can pick up the work and just do it in the background.
Now, this brings a few interesting advantages.
The first one is that you are not blocking the core application.
If it's a web server, the web server can reply to the user as fast as possible.
This is what the user expects on the web,
while all the heavy work is offloaded to the background.
If you have a peak of traffic, maybe that creates a lot of work
that you'll need to do in the background.
So by having a queue and having workers, you have a decoupled system,
and basically you can decide to scale up the workers' part.
So add more and more workers to be able to respond
to that increased demand for background work.
And that can be very elastic, so when the demand is over,
maybe you go back to a normal,
you can remove all the workers that you don't need anymore.
And also that adds resiliency, because if something fails,
the queuing mechanism can automatically recognize that a job failed
and put it back in the queue, so that means that another worker
would pick it up again later and you can retry it automatically.
And even more interesting, if that particular job keeps failing,
you can add rules to basically move that job on the site.
They are generally called dead letter queues.
So it's basically another queue where you store all the jobs
that you were not able to process, and a human can just go there
and try to figure out why this consistently failed.
Maybe there is a bug.
You can fix that bug in your code and then push the message back
to the original queue, and at that point,
you are able to reprocess that message correctly.
So that's basically giving you ways to never lose jobs
and consistently be able to deliver on what the user expects.
We want to talk about Lambda and SQS together.
So how do they work together?
So with SQS, you're always using a poll-based model.
You would need something to poll the queue,
retrieve events, process them, and then delete them.
It's a fairly simple API, really,
when it comes to consuming messages from SQS,
and we covered that in detail in the previous episodes.
So traditionally, you'd use EC2 or a container
or some other piece of long-lived compute running on AWS
or even on-premises or anywhere else.
With AWS Lambda, it's a lot simpler
because you don't have to run a poller yourself.
The polling service is actually provided
as part of Lambda's Event Source Mapping feature.
And you may have used SQS and Lambda together
without knowing that there was such a feature
because a lot of things like the serverless framework or SAM
kind of create this for you transparently under the hood
when you create that trigger.
So within the AWS Lambda service,
you've got this Event Source Mapping feature,
and this is the bit that's doing the polling.
It's also the same feature that handles Lambda triggers
from Kinesis and Kafka, MQ, and DynamoDB streams.
So if you imagine a simple architecture diagram,
you've got your queue on the left
and a Lambda function on the right.
The Event Source Mapping is essentially a box in the middle
that's running that polling and passing messages from the queue
and invoking Lambda functions with the messages.
And those invocations are actually synchronous.
So they're not, with Lambda,
you've got synchronous and asynchronous invocations.
Event Source Mapping is using a synchronous invocation
and waiting for the function invocation to complete.
So Event Source Mappings are very good
because they give you a few neat features for free
that you would have to implement yourself.
Like you can control the batch size and the batching window
in terms of the number of events that arrive in a batch,
what kind of time interval they need to arrive within.
And since about a year or so ago as well,
you can also specify filters.
Some messages are filtered out
before they reach your function.
So that can save you a lot of execution time
and cost as well.
So if you imagine, if you've got an instance
or a number of EC2 instances polling from a queue,
you're in control of the processing rate and the concurrency
because it's directly linked
to the number of workers you have, right?
You can retrieve a batch of messages
and process them with whatever cluster size
or worker pool size you have running.
Now with Lambda, the Event Source Mapping
is doing this for you.
So it's in control of the concurrency.
And it's this fact that's been a source of pain
for a lot of users.
And this was the case until very recently
when the AWS announced a feature
called SQS maximum concurrency support.
That makes a lot of sense to me,
but maybe we can provide an example
of what is the pain we are talking about
so we can make it more obvious to everyone.
And also how is this new feature helping
to kind of ease this particular type of pain?
Yeah, no, this is good.
Let's try and give some sort of an example.
So let's say you've got a queue that has messages relating
to signups for your SaaS application.
So user fills in a form, signs up,
they're now customer reviewers.
As part of this whole signup flow,
maybe you've got this event driven mailing list
subscription features.
So when a user signs up, you go off
and you want to make an API call to MailChimp, for example,
so that they're going to receive
your weekly user mailing list.
Now let's say in this contrived example
that MailChimp has a rate limit
of 10 invocations per second to this API.
So you've got a queue and a Lambda function
that takes the signup event and initiates a subscription
with the MailChimp API.
So you want this to scale as users sign up,
you want to have this resiliency you talked about,
but you don't want to flood this API
because it's got a rate limit.
So let's talk about the behavior
before we've got this recent change
in how Lambda and SQS work together.
So the Event Source Mapping in Lambda
starts five pollers by default,
reading messages in batches from the queue.
So let's say you've just got a batch size of one,
but you've got more than 10 messages coming in per second.
So when messages are available,
the Event Source Mapping will pass these
to running Lambda containers.
But if you've got more messages coming in
because your service is really popular
and people are signing up at a really, really fast rate,
the Event Source Mapping is still going to scale,
try and scale up the number of Lambda workers
by making synchronous invocation requests.
And it's going to increase that concurrency level
by a factor of 60 every minute.
And it will keep going up to the account concurrency limit
or the reserve concurrency or 1000, whichever is the lowest.
So in order to prevent your function
from exceeding that relative API limit,
you might set the reserve concurrency to five
because you're thinking, okay,
maybe this function takes about 500 milliseconds to invoke.
So in order to keep it at 10 per second,
I'm going to just have five concurrency.
But Event Source Mappings don't seem to know anything
about your functions reserve concurrency
or the account level concurrency.
It just keeps scaling up.
So the Lambda for service will stop there
from being more than that number of concurrent workers,
but Event Source Mapping
just keeps trying to invoke functions anyway.
And this results in invocations being throttled.
So this can happen in a lot of different cases,
like when other functions
are consuming the account concurrency
and there just isn't the available capacity as well.
It can even happen if you've got cases
where you've got multiple Event Source Mappings
invoking the same function, which is also possible
because each one is scaling independently.
So this has been a source of a lot of pain
for use cases like this.
So what happens when the throttling actually occurs
and how can we actually leverage
this new maximum concurrency feature
to make our life easier?
Yes, when the throttling occurs,
messages are going to go back onto the queue
once the visibility time has been reached.
And if this keeps happening after a number of retries,
which is configurable, the message will be discarded,
or if you've got a dead letter queue,
it will end up in your dead letter queue.
So the new maximum concurrency feature
is really doing exactly what it implies.
It's specifying a maximum number of invocations
at the Event Source Mapping level.
So you don't need to use a reserved concurrency
for the function,
although you can use both together in combination.
So it solves the problem by essentially
capping the number of concurrent invocations
and reducing the excess of throttling
that can happen with the default behavior.
So it's helpful for our example,
when you don't want to flood the third party API
with requests that might cause a rate limiting error,
it means you don't have to use a reserve concurrency,
which can be annoying for people,
because when you use reserve concurrency,
you're also taking away capacity from other functions.
It's also nice for anyone using multiple events
or mapping with the same function
that you can now control the concurrency
of each trigger independently,
instead of just the function as a whole.
Yeah, that makes a lot of sense.
Basically before we were effectively hacking the system,
trying to limit the number of execution
with something that was not necessarily meant
to be used in that way.
And that was creating the side effect
that the event source mapper
was still trying to trigger your Lambda
and probably you would end up with a lot messages
in the dead letter queue,
just because there wasn't capacity to execute them,
not because the messages were actually failing.
So probably this will lead to a lot of false positives
and then somebody needs to look at them, retry them,
and a lot of like overhead
for just because for lacking the capacity of saying,
I don't want you to run more
than a certain number of Lambdas at any given time
for this particular source of events.
So that makes a lot of sense.
Is there any other improvement
that we would like to see in this integration
between Lambda and SQS?
One of the things I mentioned
was that the scaling rate of Lambda and SQS,
it's adding 60 concurrent function executions per minute.
Now this is pretty slow scaling rate.
And if you've got like batch processing workloads
when suddenly you've got tens of thousands
of requests coming in and you want to scale out
to maybe hundreds of thousands
of Lambda functions concurrently,
adding 60 every minute is really slow.
And I've encountered this myself
and then had to use other mechanisms.
So if you have just the Lambda API
and you call invoke directly with the async mode,
then you can scale to thousands of concurrent functions
in seconds.
And I know for a fact that that's using SQS internally
to manage that queue of invocations as well.
So it's still a bit strange that SQS
seems to be really slowing down your scaling rate
and other events sources don't,
like with Kinesis, it's tied to the number of shards.
So this is a bit limiting.
So I would like to see if there was a new future coming out
in this integration, I'd like to see that changed
and make it more configurable so that you could at least,
if you choose to,
you can scale up much faster than that.
That would be my number one next feature.
That makes a lot of sense.
I also have a slightly related comment
that another feature that is available in Lambda
is that you can consume messages in batches,
not necessarily just one by one.
Now this is not necessarily going to solve this problem
because yeah, this problem still exists,
but it's another dimension that you might use,
for instance, to handle throttling
or to handle cases where you want to,
where maybe the task that you need to perform
is very small and therefore it makes sense
to try to get this task together.
So you pull once from the queue and then you,
that Lambda that gets executed can do
a certain number of dams together
rather than just doing that one by one.
So this is just something to keep in mind
and something we mentioned in the other SQS episodes.
So maybe check out that particular feature
if you're trying to figure out what kind of patterns
you can use when using SQS.
With that being said,
are there resources that we want to recommend people
if they want to deep dive?
A lot of people have been writing and talking about this maximum concurrency feature recently,
but I think the best place to go is the series of articles
written by Zach Charles,
who described this problem very well
when he originally encountered it,
described how to reproduce that problem
and has now written a followup in that series
about how this solves maximum concurrent,
how this maximum concurrency feature solves the problem,
but also some other things you might want to watch out for.
So that is definitely the go-to guide here.
We will also include a link to the AWS blog post
and sample code provided with the announcement.
There's a SAM template that you can use
to explore the new feature.
And of course, do check out our previous episode on SQS
and all our other series on all the AWS event services.
So that's it for today's episode.
Thank you very much for joining us
and we'll see you in the next episode.